=== p-01.png ===
. p
— :
MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY ‘
; ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE LABORATORY ;
. A.I. Memo 521 . June 1979
; A TRUTH MAINTENANCE SYSTEM
Jon Doyle .
e
oN. Abstract: To choose their actions, reasoning programs must be able to make assumptions :
-* and subsequently revise their beliefs when discoveries contradict these assumptions. The
; Truth Maintenance System (TMS) is a problem solver subsystem for performing these
functions by recording and maintaining the reasons for program beliefs. Such recorded :
reasons are useful in constructing explanations of program actions and in guiding the
course of action of a problem solver. This paper describes (1) the representations and
structure of the TMS, (2) the mechanisms used to revise the current set of beliefs, (3) how
dependency-directed backtracking changes the current set of assumptions, (4) techniques for
summarizing explanations of beliefs, (5) how to organize problem solvers into “dialectically
arguing” modules, (6) how to revise models of the belief systems of others, and (7) methods .
for embedding control structures in patterns of assumptions. We stress the need of problem
solvers to choose between alternative systems of beliefs, and outline a mechanism by which a
problem solver can employ rules guiding choices of what to believe, what to want, and what
to do. ;
This research was conducted at the Artificial Intelligence Laboratory of the Massachusetts ;
Institute of Technology. Support for the Laboratory's artificial intelligence research is
provided in part by the Advanced Research Projects Agency of the Department of Defense
under Office of Naval Research contract number N00014-75-C-0643, and in part by NSF
grant MCS77-04828, |
on ; MAS. -
© MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY 1979
aan een een nnEEEEREE ene... usaTLEEeeamyreeEeEeEeEeErOrr LL eee

=== p-02.png ===
Acknowledgements: This paper is based on a thesis submitted in partial fulfillment of the
degree of Master of Science to the department of Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology on May 12, 1977. Sections 6 and 7
contain material not reported in that thesis. Although I have held the views expressed in
Section Ll for several years, I found my prior attempts at explaining them unsatisfactory, so
these views appear here for the first time as well. I thank Gerald Jay Sussman (thesis .
advisor), Johan de Kleer, Scott Fahlman, Philip London, David McAllester, Drew
McDermott, Marvin Minsky, Howard Shrobe, Richard M. Stallman, Guy L. Steele, Jr., and
Alan Thompson for ideas and comments. de Kleer, Steele, Marilyn Matz, Richard Fikes,
Randall Davis, Shrobe, and the referees of the Journal Artificial Intelligence gave me
: valuable editorial advice. I thank’the Fannie and John Hertz Foundation for supporting
my research with a graduate fellowship.
Contents:
1. Introduction 3
I The Essence of the Theory a) :
mn ; 1.2 Basic Terminology 7
2. Representation of Reasons for Beliefs 9 ;
2.1 States of Belief 9
2.2 Justifications 10
2.3 Support-List Justifications 11
2.4 Terminology of Dependency Relationships 12
2.5 Conditional-Proof Justifications 13
2.6 Other Types of Justifications 14
3. Truth Maintenance Mechanisms 14
3.1 Circular Arguments 14
; 3.2 The Truth Maintenance Process , 16
3.3 Analyzing Conditional-Proofs - 19
4. Dependency-Directed Backtracking 20
5. Summarizing Arguments 23
6. Dialectical Arguments 25
7. Models of Other's Beliefs 27
8. Assumptions and the Problem of Control 29
8.1 Default Assumptions 30
8.2 Sequences of Alternatives 32
8.3 Equivalence Class Representatives 7 33
9. Experience and Extensions 35
10. Discussion , 36
~ Il. Bibliography 39
ee

=== p-03.png ===
Pees ee ee ‘n memory of John Sheridan Mac Nerney ee
x oo I Introduction Duagss
eg pac tied gh Computer reasoning programs usually construct computational models of situations. To ;
vee? keep ‘these models consistent with new information and changes in the situations being
ee ee "modelled, the reasoning programs frequently need to remove or change portions of their ee
< “models. These changes sometimes lead to further changes, for the reasoner often constructs '
Pe some parts of the model by making inferences from other Parts of the model. This paper
~~ Studies both the problem of how to make changes in computational models, and the ;
; “underlying problem of how the models should be constructed in order to make making ,
ere - changes convenient. Our approach is to record the reasons for believing or using each
; "program belief, inference rule, or procedure. To allow new information to displace previous
wot conclusions, we employ "non-monotonic" reasons for beliefs, in which one belief depends on
; a lack of belief in some other statement. We use a program called the Truth Maintenance
. : System! (TMS) to determine the current set of beliefs from the current set of reasons, and to
PONE update the current set of beliefs in accord with new reasons in a (usually) incremental
; : a fashion. To perform these revisions, the TMS traces the reasons for beliefs to find the
“consequences of changes in the set of assumptions.
fat eee gets Lt The Essence of the Theory
EPPS Sn Many treatments of formal and informal reasoning in mathematical logic and artificial
“+ intelligence have been shaped in large part by a seldom acknowledged view: the view that
: : the process of reasoning is the process of deriving new knowledge from old, the process of
oe = discovering new truths contained in known truths. This view, as it is simply understood,
ee has several severe difficulties as a theory of reasoning. In this section, I propose another,
eae quite different view about the nature of reasoning. I incorporate some new concepts into
; Pals - this view, and the combination overcomes the problems exhibited by the conventional view.
pe Briefly put, the problems with the conventional view of reasoning stem from the
es “monotonicity of the sequence of states of the reasoner’s beliefs: his beliefs are true, and truths ~
cee ; : never change, so the only action of reasoning is to augment the current set of beliefs with
Ge rege more beliefs. This monotonicity leads to three Closely related problems involving
se etal “commonsense reasoning, the frame problem, and control. To some extent, my criticisms here
Ss of the conventional view of reasoning will be amplifications of Minsky’s (36) criticisms of
Belge a 1. As we shall see, this term not only sounds like Orwellian Newspeak, but also is probably
MOP a misnomer. The name stems from historical accident, and rather than change it here, I
: retain it to avoid confusion in the literature.
a

=== p-04.png ===
‘ -4-
: :
oo
the logistic approach to problem solving.

One readily recalls examples of the ease with which we resolve apparent
contradictions involving our commonsense beliefs about the world, For example, we
routinely make assumptions about the permanence of objects and the typical features or
Properties of objects, yet we smoothly accommodate corrections to the assumptions and can
quickly explain our errors away. In such cases, we discard old conclusions in favor of new

‘ evidence. Thus, the set of our commonsense beliefs changes non-monotonically.

Our beliefs of what is current also change non-monotonically. If we divide the
trajectory of the temporally evolving set of beliefs into discrete temporal situations, then at
each instant the most recent situation is the set of current beliefs, and the preceding
Situations are past sets of beliefs. Adjacent sets of beliefs in this trajectory are usually closely
related, ‘as most of our actions have only a relatively small set of effects. The important

- point is that the trajectory does not form a Sequence of monotonically increasing sets of a5
beliefs, since many actions change what we expect is true in the world. Since we base our ;
actions on what we currently believe, we must continually update our current set of beliefs.

The problem of describing and perfoming this updating efficiently is sometimes called the
frame problem. In connection with the frame problem, the conventional view suffers not
only from monotonicity, but also from atomicity, as it encourages viewing each belief as an
~ isolated statement, related to other beliefs only through its semantics. Since the semantics of
beliefs are usually not explicitly represented in the system, if they occur there at all,
atomicity means that these incremental changes in the set of current beliefs are difficult to
compute. .
The third problem with the conventional view actually subsumes the problem of
commonsense reasoning and the frame problem. The problem of control is the problem of
: deciding what to do next. Rather than make this choice blindly, many have suggested that
; we might apply the reasoner to this task as well, to make inferences about which inferences
to make. This approach to the problem of control has not been explored much, in part
because such control inferences are useless in monotonic systems. In these systems, adding
more inference rules or axioms just increases the number of inferences possible, rather than
preventing some inferences from being made. One gets the unwanted inferences together
with new conclusions confirming their undesireability.

Rather than give it up, we pursue this otherwise attractive approach, and make
the deliberation required to choose actions a form of reasoning as well. For our purposes,
we take the desires and intentions of the reasoner to be represented in his set of current
beliefs as beliefs about his own desires and intention. We also take the set of inference rules
by which the reasoning process occurs to be represented as beliefs about the reasoner’s own ,
computational structure. By using this self-referential, reflexive representation of the
reasoner, the inference rules become rules for self-modification of the reasoncr's set of beliefs
(and hence his desires and intentions as well). The control problem of choosing which
inference rule to follow takes the form "Look at yourself as an object (as a set of beliefs), and
choose what (new set of beliefs) you would like to become.”

os The language of such inference rules, and the language for evaluating which
self-change to make, are for the most part outside the language of inference rules
~~ reentrant

=== p-05.png ===
Se encouraged by the conventional view of reasoning. For example, when the current set of :
: beliefs is inconsistent, one uses rules like "Reject the smallest set of beliefs possible to restore =.
; ; consistency” and "Reject those beliefs which represent the simplest explanation of the ~
af _ __iticonsistency." These sorts of rules are all we have, since we cannot infallibly analyze errors Pagirc
or predict the future, yet these rules are non-monotonic, since they lead to removing beliefs
“cue ces, puse)from the set of current beliefs. . ; :
AOS EE SESE SEG repeat, one source of each of these problems is the monotonicity inherent in
aaa the conventional view of reasoning. I now propose a different view, and some new concepts
Les “which have far reaching consequences for these issues. oes
, ; a . Rational thought is the process of finding reasons for attitudes: | ;
- . To Say that some attitude (such as belief, desire, intent, or action) is rational is to say that ‘
there is some acceptable reason for holding that attitude. Rational thought is the process of
; _ finding such acceptable reasons. Whatever purposes the reasoner may have, such as
solving problems, finding answers, or taking action, it operates by constructing reasons for
believing things, desiring things, intending things, or doing or willing things. The actual
a. "attitude in the reasoner occurs only as a by-product of constructing reasons. The current set ;
: of beliefs and desires arises from the current set of reasons for beliefs and desires, reasons
ae phrased in terms of other beliefs and desires. When action is taken, it is because some
; reason for the action can be found in terms of the beliefs and desires of the actor. I stress
“: again, the only real component of thought is the current set of reasons - the attitudes such ;
eit as beliefs and desires arise from the set of reasons, and have no independent existence.
sects biitplatel ais j One consequence of this view is that to study rational thought, we should study
: “-- justified belief or reasoned argument, and ignore questions of truth. Truth enters into the
ee Study of extra-psychological rationality and into what commonsense truisms we decide to
: Bl Shee - Supply to our programs, but truth does not enter into the narrowly psychological rationality ©
, he by which our programs operate.
Ba : Of course, this sort of basic rationality is simpler to realize than human belief.
cae Humans exhibit "burn-in" phenomena in which long-standing beliefs come to be believed
‘3 independently of their reasons, and humans sometimes undertake “leaps of faith” which
ark vault them into self-justifying sets of beliefs, but we will not study these issues here. Instead,
; we restrict ourselves to the more modest goal of making rational programs in this simpler ;
sense.
; The view stated above entails that for each statement or Proposition P just one of
= two states obtains: Either
; (A) P has at least one currently acceptable (valid) reason, and is thus a member of the
current set of beliefs, or ~
on : (B) P has no currently acceptable reasons (either no reasons at all, or only unacceptable
: ones), and is thus not a member of the current set of beliefs. :
eee

=== p-06.png ===
- If P falls in state (A), we say that P is in (the current set of beliefs), and otherwise, that P is
-* out (of the current set of beliefs). These states are not symmetric, for while reasons can be
° mAs constructed to make P in, no reason can make P out. (At most, it can make +P in as well.) ; :
~ os *= This shows that the proposed view also succumbs to monotonicity problems, for ;
- the set of reasons grows’ monotonically, which (with the normal sense of "reason") leads to
© gy sees aeps,Only monotonic increases in the set of current beliefs. To solve the problem of monotonicity,
owe introduce hovel meanings for the terms "a reason” and "an assumption.” ae
TE SEE ace OO _. Traditionally, a reason for a belief consists of a set of other beliefs, such that if
; - 5" “each of these basis beliefs is held, so also is the reasoned belief. To get off the ground, this ;
analysis of reasons requires either circular arguments between beliefs (and the appropriate
initial state of belief) or some fundamental type of belief which grounds all other arguments.
os The traditional view takes these fundamental beliefs, often called assumptions (or premises),
. as believed without reason. On this view, the reasoner makes changes in the the current set
_ Of beliefs by removing some of the current assumptions and adding some new ones. :
a To conform with the proposed view, we introduce meanings for “reason” and ;
5 “assumption” such that assumptions also have reasons. A reason (or justification) for a
; belief consists of an ordered pair of sets of other beliefs, such that the reasoned belief is in
om ce by virtue of this reason only if each belief in the first set is in, and each belief in the second
: 3 Set is owt. An assumption is a current belief one of whose valid reasons depends on a
ae ~~ non-current belief, that is, has a non-empty second set of antecedent beliefs. With these
UEERERCE notions we can create “ungrounded” yet reasoned beliefs by making assumptions. (Eg. give
ea ; P the reason ({},{-P}).) We can also effect non-monotonic changes in the set of current
sole beliefs by giving reasons for some of the out statements used in the reasons for current
Se cee assumptions. (Eg. to get rid of P, justify -P.) We somewhat loosely say that when. we
steer ont Justify some out belief supporting an assumption, (e.g. -P), we are denying or retracting the
ies _ assumption (P).
ie : These new notions solve the monotonicity problem. Following from this solution a
ae we find ways of treating the commonsense reasoning, frame, and control problems plaguing
eee the conventional view of reasoning. Commonsense default expectations we represent as
- I new-style assumptions. Part of the frame problem, namely how to non-monotonically
os change the set of current beliefs, follows from this non-monotonic notion of reason.
ae However, much of the frame problem (eg. how to give the “laws of motion” and how to -
retrieve them efficiently) lies outside the scope of this discussion. The control problem can |
car be dealt with partially by embedding the sequence of procedural states of the reasoner in i
: ; Patterns of assumptions. We will treat this idea, and the rest of the control problem, in
; ; more detail later.
; Other advantages over the conventional view -also follow, One of these
‘ : advantages involves how the reasoner retracts assumptions. With the traditional notion of
: assumption, retracting assumptions was unreasoned. If the reasoner removed an assumption
: from the current set of beliefs, the assumption remained out until the reasoner specifically
“o™ a put it back into the set of current beliefs, even if changing circumstances obviated the value
of removing this belief. The new notions introduce instead the reasoned retraction of
assumptions. This means that the reasoner retracts an assumption only by giving a reason
ent nenernnennpaenmnipriie e

=== p-07.png ===
' -7-
om
for why it should be retracted. If later this reason becomes invalid, then the retraction is no :
longer effective and the assumption is restored to the current set of beliefs.

. The reasoned retraction of assumptions helps in formulating a class of
backtracking procedures which revise the set of current assumptions when inconsistencies -
are discovered. The paradigm procedure of this sort we call dependency-directed
backtracking after Stallman and Sussman [53]. It is the least specialized procedure for
revising the current set of assumptions in the sense that it only operates on the reasons for ;

beliefs, not on the forri or content of the beliefs. In short, it traces backwards through the
reasons for the conflicting beliefs, finds the set of assumptions reached in this way, and then
retracts one of the assumptions. with a reason involving the other assumptions. (We
‘ . describe the procedure in detail later.) Dependency-directed backtracking serves as a
template for more specialized revision procedures. These specialized procedures are
necessary in almost all practical applications, and go beyond the general procedure by
taking the form of the beliefs they examine into account when choosing which assumption
to reject.
1.2 Basic Terminology
fn The TMS records and maintains arguments for potential program beliefs, so as to
distinguish, at all times, the current set of program beliefs. It manipulates two data ;
structures: nodes, which represent beliefs, and justifications, which represent reasons for
beliefs. We write St(N) to denote the statement of the potential belief represented by the
node N. We say the TMS believes in (the potential belief represented by) a node if it has
. an argument for the node and believes in the nodes involved in the argument. This may
_ Seem circular, but some nodes will have arguments which involve no other believed nodes, :
ahd so form the base step for the definition. ,

As its fundamental actions, (I) the TMS can create a new node, to which the
problem solving program using the TMS can attach the statement of a belief (or inference
rule, or procedure, or data structure). The TMS leaves all manipulation of the statements
of nodes (for inference, representation, etc.) to the program using the TMS. (2) It can add
(or retract) a new justification for a node, to represent a step of an argument for the belief
represented by the node. This argument step usually represents the application of some rule :
of procedure in the problem solving program. Usually, the rules or procedures also have
TMS nodes, which they include in the justifications they create. (3) Finally, the TMS can
mark a node as a contradiction, to represent the inconsistency of any set of beliefs which :
enter into an argument for the node.

‘ A new justification for a node may lead the TMS to believe in the node. If the

TMS did not believe in the node previously, this may in turn allow other nodes to be

believed by previously existing but incomplete arguments. In this case, the TMS invokes

the fruth maintenance procedure to make any necessary revisions in the set of beliefs. The

TMS revises the current set of beliefs by using the recorded justifications to compute

ons non-circular arguments for nodes from premises and other special nodes, as described later.
These non-circular arguments distinguish one justification as the well-founded supporting

enn rerornananneeeene

=== p-08.png ===
, ; - fustification of each node representing a current belief. The TMS locates the set of nodes to
update by finding those nodes whose well-founded arguments depend on changed nodes. ;
“The program using the TMS can indicate the inconsistency of the beliefs
_ represented by certain currently believed nodes by using these nodes in an argument for a
; ‘new node, and by then’ marking the new node as a contradiction. When this happens,
ial itis Seon, “another: Process of the TMS, dependency-directed backtracking, analyzes the well-founded :
oo  atgument of the contradiction node to locate the assumptions (special types of nodes defined
: coos = later) occurring in the argument. It then makes a record of the inconsistency of this set of e
Oe assumptions, and uses this record to change one of the assumptions. After this change, the
~~" contradiction node is no longer believed. We explain this process in Section 4. ,
joes “so The TMS employs a_ special type of justification, called a non-monotonic
meee Justification, to make tenative guesses. A non-monotonic justification bases an argument for
“a node not only on current belief in other nodes, as occurs in the most familiar forms of
‘ deduction and reasoning, but also on lack of current belief in other nodes. For example,
One might justify a node N-1 representing a statement P on the basis of lack of belief in
5 node N-2 representing the statement —P. In this case, the TMS would hold N-1 as a
2 -.-_ current belief as long as N-2 was not among the current beliefs, and we would say that it
cn” : had assumed belief in N-1. More generally, by an assumption we mean any node whose
; well-founded support is a non-monotonic justification. .
Bae : As a small example of the use of the TMS, suppose that a hypothetical office
cng a scheduling program considers holding a meeting on Wednesday. To do this, the program :
assumes that the meeting is on Wednesday. The inference system of the program includes a
saa . tule which draws the conclusion that due to regular commitments, any meeting on
DSR oe Wednesday must occur at 1:00 P.M. However, the fragment of the schedule for the week
: constructed so far has some activity scheduled for that time already, and so another rule
che concludes the meeting cannot be on Wednesday. We write these nodes and rule-constructed
ae “justifications as follows:
i Node — Statement . Justification , Comment
entra NGL DAY (M) = WEDNESDAY (SLO (N-2)} an assumption ;
CONS NA DAY (M) * WEDNESDAY no justification yet :
N-3 TIME(M) = 13:88 (SL (R-37 N-1) ())
; , The above notation for the justifications indicates that they belong to the class of
oe Support-list (SL) justifications. Each of these’ justifications consists of two lists of nodes. A
SL-justification is a valid reason for belief if and only if each of the nodes in the first list is
see believed and each of the nodes in the second list is not believed. In the example, if the two
justifications listed above are the only existing justifications, then N-2 is not a current belief
. Since it has no justifications at all. N-1 is believed since the justification for N-1 specifies
that this node depends on the lack of belief in N-2. The justification for N-3 shows that ‘
on N-3 depends on a (presumably believed) node R-37. In this case, R-37 represents a rule i
acting on (the statement represented by) N-1. :
; Subsequently another rule (represented by a node R-9) acts on beliefs about the
—_—reeneeneneeeneercensennennr=rweriwraierietesnrereriinnie ip pe ee oe

