=== p-01.png ===
Why There Are Complementary Learning Systems in the Hippocampus
and Neocortex: Insights From the Successes and Failures of
Connectionist Models of Learning and Memory
James L. McClelland Bruce L. McNaughton
Carnegie Mellon University University of Arizona

and the Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition
Randall C. O’Reilly
‘ Carnegie Mellon University
and the Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition
Damage to the hippocampal system disrupts recent memory but leaves remote memory intact. The
account presented here suggests that memories are first stored via synaptic changes in the hippo-
campal system, that these changes support reinstatement of recent memories in the neocortex, that
neocortical synapses change a little on each reinstatement, and that remote memory is based on
accumulated neocortical changes. Models that learn via changes to connections help explain this
organization. These models discover the structure in ensembles of items if learning of each item is
gradual and interleaved with learning about other items. This suggests that the neocortex learns
slowly to discover the structure in ensembles of experiences. The hippocampal system permits rapid
learning of new items without disrupting this structure, and reinstatement of new memories in-
terleaves them with others to integrate them into structured neocortical memory systems.

One of the most striking neuropsychological phenomena ever is temporally graded retrograde amnesia. Considerable evi-
reported is the dramatic amnesia produced by bilateral lesions dence now supports the conclusion that the influence of the hip-
to the hippocampus and related temporal lobe structures pocampal system on the ability to exploit information derived
(Scoville & Milner, 1957). A crucial aspect of this phenomenon from past experience in a wide range of tasks is temporally cir-

cumscribed: Performance is impaired if the hippocampal sys-
——_-__—_-. tem is damaged before or within a window of time after the

James L. McClelland and Randall C. O’Reilly, Department of Psy- initial experience; however, if the hippocampal system is left
chology, Carnegie Mellon University, and the Center for the Neural Basis intact both during the experience and for a period of time there-
of Cognition; Bruce L. McNaughton, Departments of Psychology and —_— after’ subsequent damage may have little or no impact on
Physiology and Arizona Research Laboratories, Division of Neural Sys- formance
tems, Memory and Aging, University of Arizona. pe . .

The work reported herein was supported by National Institute of . This change in dependence on the hippocampal system over
Mental Health Grants MH00385, MH47566, and MH46823; byacol- __ time appears to be a slow, gradual process. This gradual change
laborative grant from the Human Frontiers Program; by a Center Grant has often been called consolidation, but the term really only
from the McDonnell-Pew Program in Cognitive Neuroscience; and by labels the phenomenon. In this article, we focus on consolida-
a fellowship from the Office of Naval Research. tion and consider what produces it and why it occurs. We ask,

We thank Carol Barnes, Sue Becker, Marlene Behrmann, Loren _Js the phenomenon a reflection of an arbitrary property of the
Frank, Mark Gluck, Robert French, Patrick Lynn, Mort Mishkin, nervous system, or does it reflect some crucial aspect of the
Catherine Myers, David Plaut, William Skaggs, Craig Stark, Robert mechanisms of learning and memory? Is the fact that consoli-
Sutherland, Larry Squire, and Matthew Wilson for useful discussions or dati k . 1 . .
comments on earlier versions of this article. Lynn Nadel’s contributions ation can tal € quite a ong time—up to 15 years: or more in
to the initial formulation of some of these ideas and to several revisions SMe cases—just an arbitrary parameter, or does it reflect an
of the article were extensive and are gratefully acknowledged. important design principle?

The computational arguments developed here were sketched in a So- We begin with a brief overview of the neuropsychology of
ciety for Neurosciences abstract (McClelland, McNaughton, O’Reilly, memory, emphasizing the temporally circumscribed role of the
& Nadel, 1992) and an invited review of several projects involving —_ hippocampal system, and elaborate one possible account of the
James L. McClelland that referred to the present article as a work in functional organization of memory that is broadly consistent
Progress (McClelland, 1994b). Preliminary versions of the simulations with the neuropsychological evidence, as well as aspects of the
of retrograde amnesia in rats and monkeys were previously presented derlyi t d physiol We then d ibe 1
in a Psychonomic Society abstract (McClelland, McNaughton, & underlying ana omy an Pp ysiology. We then describe results
O'Reilly, 1993). from connectionist modeling research that suggest reasons for

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to James _ this organization and for the phenomenon of gradual consolida-
L. McClelland, Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, tion. From the insights gained through the consideration of
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213. Electronic mail may be sent via In- these models, we develop illustrative simulation models of the
ternet to mcclelland+@cmu.edu. phenomenon of temporally graded retrograde amnesia. These

419

=== p-02.png ===
420 J. MCCLELLAND, B. MCNAUGHTON, AND R. O’REILLY ;
are not detailed neural models; rather, they illustrate, at an ab- word are unhelpful in this task, which depends on recall of the
stract level, what we take consolidation to be about. We discuss word that previously occurred with the cue word in the list
the implications of our view of the role of consolidation for study context. Hippocampal system lesions produce profound
findings related to age, species, and task differences in neocorti- impairments in learning arbitrary paired associates (Scoville &
cal learning and for the form of representations used in the hip- Milner, 1957). However, it should be noted that deficits are not
pocampus, and we conclude with a comparison of our views apparently restricted to tasks that rely on memories that are
and those of others who have theorized about the role of the explicitly accessed and used to govern task performance. For
hippocampal system in learning and memory. Although there example, amnesics are also impaired in acquisition of arbitrary
are many points of compatibility, our approach differs from new factual information, whether or not the use of this infor-
some others in treating gradual consolidation as reflecting a mation is accompanied by deliberate or conscious recollection
principled aspect of the design of the mammalian memory of previous experience (Shimamura & Squire, 1987). Also,
system. normal participants show sensitivity to novel associations after
a single presentation in stem completion tasks, but profound
Role of the Hippocampal System in Learning and amnesics do not (Schacter & Graf, 1986; Shimamura & Squire,
Memory 1989). Although recent evidence (Bowers & Schacter, 1993)
suggests that normal participants who show sensitivity to novel

The phrase the hippocampal system is widely used to refer associations are conscious of having accessed these associations
to a system of interrelated brain regions found in a range of _ on at least some trials, sensitivity to novel associations is disso-
mammalian species that appear to play a special role in learning ciable in several ways from standard measures of explicit or de-
and memory. The exact boundaries of the hippocampal system clarative memory (Graf & Schacter, 1987; Schacter & Graf,
are difficult to define, but it includes at least the hippocampus 1989). Thus, at this point the extent to which deficits in amne-
itself—the CA 1-3 fields of Ammon’s Horn and the dentate gy- sics are restricted to tasks that depend on conscious access to
rus—the subicular complex, and the entorhinal cortex. It prob- the contents of prior episodes or events is unclear. It does appear
ably also encompasses adjacent structures including the peri- that, in humans, an intact hippocampal system is necessary for
rhinal and parahippocampal cortices. the formation of an association between arbitrarily paired

The literature on the effects of damage to the hippocampal words that is sufficiently strong after a single presentation to
system is quite vast. Here we summarize what we believe are have an effect on subsequent performance, whether explicit
the main points. memory is involved or not.

1. An extensive lesion of the hippocampal system can pro- In the animal literature, the exact characterization of the
duce a profound deficit in new learning while leaving other cog- forms of learning that depend on the hippocampal system re-
nitive functions and memory performance based on material mains a matter of intense investigation and debate. Sutherland
acquired well before the lesion apparently normal. Dramatic and Rudy (1989) suggested that the hippocampal system is cru-
evidence of this effect was first reported by Scoville and Milner cial for learning to make appropriate responses that depend not
(1957) in their description of the anterograde amnesia pro- on individual cues but on specific combinations or conjunctions
duced in patient HM as a result of bilateral removal of large of cues, what they called cue configurations. The paradigm ex-
portions of the hippocampal system and other temporal lobe ample of a task depending on cue configurations is the negative
structures. HM presented initially with a profound deficit in patterning task, in which animals receive reward for operant
memory for events that occurred either after the lesion or dur- responses to a light and a tone but not the tone-light compound.
ing the weeks and months before it, but with intact intellectual Hippocampal system lesions lead to deficits in responding
function and information-processing skills and apparent spar- differently to the compound than to the individual cues (Rudy
ing of his memory for more remote time periods. & Sutherland, 1989). N. J. Cohen and Eichenbaum (1993)

2. The effects of lesions to the hippocampal system appear to have emphasized the importance of the hippocampal system
be selective to certain forms of learning. In humans, the hippo- for flexible access to memory traces, a characteristic that may
campal system appears to be essential for the rapid formation be closely related to declarative memory in humans. A major
of comprehensive associations among the various elements of alternative viewpoint is that of O’Keefe and Nadel (1978), who
specific events and experiences, in a form sufficient to sustain have suggested that the hippocampal system is especially rele-
an explicit (Schacter, 1987) retrieval of the contents of the ex- vant in the formation of memories involving places or locations
perience, so that they can be attested (explicitly recognized as in the environment, and there is a vast body of evidence that
memories), verbally described, or flexibly used to govern sub- spatial learning is impaired after hippocampal lesions in rats.
sequent behavior. N. J. Cohen and Squire (1980) introduced One view of spatial learning that is compatible with both the
the term declarative memory to encompass these forms of | Sutherland and Rudy (1989) and the O’Keefe and Nadel
memory. Included in the category of declarative memories are (1978) theories is that place learning involves forming config-
episodic memories (Tulving, 1983)—-memories for the specific ural associations of locations and movements that would enable
contents of individual episodes or events—as well as what are prediction of the spatial consequence of a given movement in a
generally termed semantic memories, including knowledge of given spatial context (McNaughton, Leonard, & Chen, 1989).
the meanings of words, factual information, and encyclopedic This can be seen as a special case of the Sutherland and Rudy
memories (see Squire, 1992, for a recent discussion). A para- (1989) theory, and it is possible that it may be the evolutionary
digm example of this form of memory is paired-associates forerunner of the more general processing capability. In any
learning of arbitrary word pairs. Prior associations to the cue case, increasing evidence suggests that damage restricted to the

=== p-03.png ===
COMPLEMENTARY LEARNING SYSTEMS 421
hippocampus affects tasks that require the animal to learn re- system damage (for reviews, see Barnes, 1988; O’Keefe & Na-
sponses specific to particular nonspatial combinations of cues, del, 1978; Rudy & Sutherland, 1994). A fuller consideration of
or to specific contexts, as well as tasks that depend on learning _ these forms of conditioning is presented in a later section.
to navigate in a previously unfamiliar spatial environment 4. Lesions to the hippocampal system and bilateral electro-
(Jarrard, 1993; Rudy & Sutherland, 1994).' More extensive le- convulsive treatment (ECT) appear to give rise to a temporally
sions of the hippocampal system lead to deficits in a broader graded retrograde amnesia for material acquired in the period
range of tasks. In some cases, selective lesions to just the hippo- of time preceding the lesion. Recent electrophysiological studies
campus produce little or no effect, although performance is se- (Barnes et al., 1994; Stewart & Reid, 1993) indicate that ECT
verely disturbed by a complete lesion of the entire hippocampal has profound effects on hippocampal synapses. Although tem-
system (for reviews, see Eichenbaum, Otto, & Cohen, 1994; porally graded retrograde amnesia has been the subject of con-
Jarrard, 1993). troversy (Warrington & McCarthy, 1988; Warrington & Weis-

3. Some kinds of learning appear to be completely unaffected krantz, 1978), we believe the evidence is substantial enough to
by hippocampal system lesions. Squire (1992) characterized be taken seriously, and it plays a major role in the theory devel-
these forms of memory as nondeclarative or implicit (Schacter, oped here. Early indications that retrograde amnesia may be
1987), emphasizing that they influence behavior without de- temporally graded, at least in certain forms of amnesia, came
pending on conscious or deliberate access to memory for the from the observations of Ribot ( 1882) and from the early report
contents of the events that led to these influences. Another char- of patient HM by Scoville and Milner (1957). More recent
acterization emphasizes inflexibility of use of such memories; quantitative studies of a wide range of hippocampal amnesics
they appear to influence behavior maximally when there is a suggest several conclusions (Squire, 1992).
close match between the processing carried out during the 1. Hippocampal amnesics show a selective memory deficit
learning event and the processing carried out when the later in- for material acquired shortly before the date of their lesion.
fluence of the learning event is assessed (N. J. Cohen & Eichen- Memory for very remote material appears to be completely
baum, 1993). This greater specificity appears to characterize spared; in between, there is an apparent gradient.
implicit memory as it is observed in normals as well as amnesics 2. The severity and temporal extent of the retrograde amnesia
(Schacter, 1987). Examples of forms of learning that are spared appear to vary with the extent of damage to the hippocampus
are gradually acquired skills that emerge over several sessionsof and related structures.
practice, such as the skill of tracing a figure viewed in a mirror 3. In some severe cases, the retrograde gradient can extend
(B. Milner, 1966), reading mirror-reversed print (N. J. Cohen over periods of 15 years or more.

& Squire, 1980), or anticipating subsequent items in a sequence Results from animal studies are generally consistent with the
governed by a complex stochastic grammar (Cleeremans, human data, although in the case of the animal work the retro-
1993). Hippocampal patients also appear to be spared in their grade gradient appears to cover a much briefer span of time.
ability to learn the structure common to a set of items: They are Studies in rats (Kim & Fanselow, 1992; Winocur, 1990) have
as good as normals in judging whether particular test items produced retrograde gradients covering a period of days or
come from the same prototype, or were generated by the same weeks. Primate experiments (Zola-Morgan & Squire, 1990)
finite-state grammar, as the members of a previously studied have shown a severe impairment relative to controls for mem-
list (Knowlton, Ramus, & Squire, 1992; Knowlton & Squire, ory acquired 2 or 4 weeks before surgery but not for older
1993). Spared learning is also exhibited in repetition priming memories.
tasks. These are tasks that require participants to emit some A key observation is that there is a correspondence between
response already within their capabilities, such as naming a the kinds of tasks that show retrograde amnesia and those that
word or picture (B. Milner, Corkin, & Teuber, 1968), reading show anterograde amnesia. For example, Kim and Fanselow
aloud a pronounceable nonword (Haist, Musen, & Squire, (1992) observed that the same rats who showed retrograde am-
1991), or completing a word fragment with a lexically valid. _nesia for the spatial context of a tone-shock association exhib-
completion (Graf, Squire, & Mandler, 1984). Repetition prim- ited no retrograde amnesia for the simple tone-shock associa-
ing is exhibited when the participant is later required to process tion itself. This same dissociation holds in anterograde amnesia.
a previously presented item, and a single prior presentation is A second crucial aspect of temporally graded retrograde am-
often sufficient. In many such tasks, hippocampal patients ap- nesia is the fact that, after hippocampal lesions, performance
pear indistinguishable from normals in the extent to which they on recent material can actually be worse than performance on
show facilitation from prior presentations, as long as care is somewhat older material. As Squire (1992) pointed out, this
taken to avoid the possibility that explicit recall is used to aid finding is crucial for the claim that some real consolidation
performance. Hippocampal patients exhibit spared priming of
existing associations (i.¢., an increase in the likelihood of pro- —_—_
ducing table when giving a free associate to chair after prior ' Jarrard (1993) treated the fact that Davidson, McKernan, and Jar-
presentation of table and chair together) but, as previously rard ( 1993) found no effect of alesion selective to the hippocampus per
noted, do not show priming, as normals do, aftera single prior © 1" "©BAtive patterning as evidence against a role of the hippocampus
presentation of an arbitrary, novel pair of words. Such priming ” configural learning, but Rudy and Sutherland (1994) cited a total of
effects can be obtained after multiple presentations of thenovel *” studies finding that selective hippocampal lesions lead to a deficit in
: . . : we negative patterning. Several of these studies used the ibotenate lesion of
arbitrary word pair ( Squire, 1992 ). In animal studies, Its clear —_ Jarrard (1989). Clearly, the debate is not yet settled. Further discussion
that some forms of classical or instrumental conditioning of re- of the relationship between spatial and configural approaches may be
sponses to discrete salient cues are unaffected by hippocampal found in the General Discussion section.

=== p-04.png ===
422 J. MCCLELLAND, B. MCNAUGHTON, AND R. O’REILLY
takes place because it rules out the alternative interpretation a) Winocur, 1990 b) Kim & Faneslow, 1992
that memories are initially stored in two forms whose effects are ows 08
additive: a relatively transient, hippocampal-system-dependent § 0.80 to Fy 0 ee
form and a more persistent, hippocampal-system-independent = 0.75 . 3 0s H
form. On this account, there is no alteration of the form of E 0.70 i 0.4
memory over time; rather, there is merely decay. Nevertheless, = 065 i Fy 0.3 P }
because the decay of the hippocampal memory is more rapid, g 0.60 & 0.2
there would be a gradually diminishing difference between the * 0s ie 0.1 §
two groups. Three animal studies now provide clear evidence oo 12 3 4 5 678910 “9 5 10 15 2 25 30
against this simple dual-store interpretation (Kim & Fanselow, c) Zola-Morgan & Squire, 1990 d) Squire & Cohen, 1979
1992; Winocur, 1990; Zola-Morgan & Squire, 1990); we show 0.90 20
the data from these studies in Figure |. In all three studies, per- o.8s < ie
formance of lesioned animals at test was better when there was z ve F 214
a longer delay between study and test, supporting a real change S 070 2 er 2 " Ld
in the form or location of memory. Also shown are data from 5 0.65 1 1 Ss PS
human ECT patients (Squire & Cohen, 1979) taken from a = 060 U 5 6
measure called the TV test developed by Squire and Slater 0.55 ; —
(1975). This test examined knowledge of single-season TV 050 1955075 loo 0 “seo 1008 1500 2000 2500 3000
shows, for which memory depended primarily on exposure to Days Since Lesion Days Since Lesion
the shows during the year in which they were aired. It is difficult
to rule out the possibility that the depression in the years just Figure 1, Panels a-c: Behavioral responses of animals receiving exten-
before treatment affected initial storage. It also must be noted sive hippocampal system lesions (circles) or control lesions (squares) as
that the treatment may have affected more than just the hippo- 2 function of the numbers of days elapsing between exposure to the
campal system. But no such difficulties a pply to the findings relevant experiences and the occurrence of the lesion. Bars surrounding
from the animal studies, which are very clear in two of the cases: each data point indicate the standard error. Panel a shows the percent-
. > : y . age choice of a specific sample food (out of two alternatives) by rats
In both Winocur ( 1990) and Kim and Fanselow (1992), lesions exposed to a conspecific that had eaten the sample food. Panel b shows
occurring within 24 hr of the experience led to performance fear (freezing) behavior shown by rats when returned to an environ-
indistinguishable from chance, whereas lesions occurring at ment in which they had experienced paired presentations of tones and
later points in time led to much better performance. footshock. Panel c shows choices of reinforced objects by monkeys ex-
posed to 14 training trials with each of 20 object pairs. Panel d: Recall
or : by depressed human participants of details of TV shows aired different
One Account of the Organization of Memory in the numbers of years before the time of test after electroconvulsive treat-
Brain ment [circles] or just before treatment [squares]. Here years have been
What follows is one account of the mechanisms of learning translated into days to allow comparison with the results from the ani-
: . . : . . mal studies. The curves shown in each panel are based on a simple
in the mammalian brain. The account is consistent with the model discussed in the text and depicted in Figure 14 (with the param-
data summarized earlier and with several important anatomical _ eters shown in Table 1). Note. Data in Panel a are from “Anterograde
and physiological findings that we summarize later, and it has and Retrograde Amnesia in Rats With Dorsal Hippocampal or Dor-
many points in common with the accounts offered in several somedial Thalamic Lesions,” by G. Winocur, 1990, Behavioral Brain
other synthetic treatments, beginning with Marr (1971). A Research, 38, p. 149. Copyright 1990 by Elsevier Science Publishers.
comparison with these other treatments can be found in the Reprinted with permission. Data in Panel b are from “‘Modality-Spe-
General Discussion section. cific Retrograde Amnesia of Fear,” by J. J. Kim and M. S. Fanselow,
Our account begins with the assumption that the brain ex- 1992; Science, 256, p. 676. Copyright 1992 by the American Associa-
ploits complementary learning systems. One system relies on tion for the Advancement of Science. Reprinted with permission. Data
. . ‘ : in Panel c are from “The Primate Hippocampal Formation: Evidence
adaptation of synaptic connections among the neurons directly for a Time-Limited Role in Memory Storage,” by S. Zola-Morgan and
responsible for information processing and behavior. The other —_ 1. R. Squire, 1990, Science, 250, p. 289. Copyright 1990 by the Ameri-
relies on adaptation of synaptic connections within a special can Association for the Advancement of Science. Reprinted with per-
memory system that includes the hippocampus and related mission. Data in Panel d are from “Memory and Amnesia: Resistance
structures. to Disruption Develops for Years after Learning,” by L. R. Squire and
N. Cohen, 1979, Behavioral and Neural Biology, 25, p. 118. Copyright
The Neocortical Processing System 1979 by Academic Press, Inc. Reprinted with permission.
Adaptation of synaptic connections undoubtedly occurs in a
wide range of neural processing systems in the brain; however, including the basal ganglia and the cerebellum. We comment in
for the cognitive forms of learning that are the principal focus a later section on adaptive changes produced by animal condi-
of this article, we are concerned primarily with adaptive learn- tioning paradigms in other systems such as the amygdala and
ing that is likely, in most cases, to occur in the neocortex. We various other subcortical brain structures.
suspect that the principles we propose for the neocortical sys- We view the neocortex as a collection of partially overlapping
tem also apply to other adaptive processing systems in the brain processing systems; for simplicity of reference, however, we re-
such as those that are involved in some forms of skill learning, fer to these systems collectively as the neocortical processing

=== p-05.png ===
COMPLEMENTARY LEARNING SYSTEMS 423
system. We include in this system those neocortical structures synaptic connections among neurons in the neocortical system
that we take to share the role of providing the neural substrate —_ will accumulate. When the changes arise from the repetition of
for higher level control of behavior and cognitive processing, as the same specific content (¢.g., the association between a partic-
well as other neocortical structures involved in sensory, percep- ular word and its meaning), the accumulation of such changes
tual, and output processes. Most but not all of the neocortex will provide the basis for correct performance in tasks that de-
belongs to this system: The perirhinal and parahippocampal _—_ pend on the specific content in question. When they reflect
cortices are anatomically defined as neocortex, but they appear _—_ different examples of some sort of structured relationship be-
functionally to belong at least in part to the hippocampal mem- tween inputs and outputs (e.g., the structured relation that
ory system. It may be best to consider these as borderline areas holds between the spellings of words and their sounds), they will
in which the neocortical processing system and the hippocam- _ provide the basis of an acquired cognitive skill.
pal memory systems overlap. They certainly play a crucial role
in mediating communication between the other parts of the hip- The Hippocampal Memory System
pocampal system and the neocortex. . . . .

We assume that performance of higher level behavioral and The representation of an experience in the neocortical sys-
cognitive tasks depends on the elicitation of patterns of activa. tem consists of a widely distributed pattern of neural activity.
tion over the populations of neurons in various regions of the ASJust noted, we assume that each experience gives rise to small
neocortical system by other patterns of activation over the same adaptive changes but that these changes will generally not be
or different regions. For example, in an acquired skill (such as _Sufficient to allow rapid learning of arbitrary associative con-
reading), the pattern produced by an input (such asa printed Junctions that we assume provide the substrate for explicit recall
word) elicits a corresponding pattern representing an output _f the contents of specific episodes and for other hippocampal-
(such as the motor program for pronouncing the word). Ina _System-dependent tasks. We assume that performance in such
free-association task, a pattern representing a stimulus word _aSks depends initially on substantial changes to the strengths of
elicits another pattern representing the response word. When Connections among neurons in the hippocampal system. Infor-
an arbitrary list associate in a paired-associates leaning task is ation is carried between the hippocampal system and the neo-
retrieved, the stimulus pattern must specify not only the stimu- __C0Ftical system via bidirectional pathways that translate pat-
lus word but also some information about the encoding context; _ terns of activity in the neocortical system into corresponding
however, the principle remains the same: Task performance oc- _ Patterns in the hippocampal system, and vice versa. We do not
curs through the elicitation of one pattern of activation in re. @8Sume that the hippocampal system receives a direct copy of
sponse to another that serves as a cue. For this to work in tasks _ the pattern of activation distributed over the higher level regions
requiring the contextually appropriate retrieval of patterns of of the neocortical system; instead, the neocortical representa-
activation representing specific propositions, events, and so tion is thought to be re-represented in a compressed format over
forth, the system must be structured in such a way that any a much smaller number of neurons in the hippocampal system,
aspect of the content of the target pattern, as well-as patterns McNaughton (1989) has referred to this compressed pattern as
representing material associated with the target pattern, can a “summary sketch” of the current neocortical representation.
serve as retrieval cues. Such compression can often occur without loss of essential in-

Patterns are elicited by the propagation of activation via syn- formation if there is redundancy in the neocortical representa-
aptic connections among the neurons involved. The knowledge tions. The familiar data compression schemes that are used for
that underlies the processing capabilities of the neocortex is Computer files exploit such redundancy, and very high levels of
stored in these connections. Thus, the knowledge is assumed to compression may be possible if the patterns being compressed
be embedded in the very neural circuits that carry out the tasks are highly constrained or redundant. Artificial neural networks
that use the information. structurally similar to those suggested by Figure 2 are quite

We assume that every occasion of information processing in commonly used to perform pattern compression and decom-
the neocortical system gives rise to adaptive adjustments to the Pression (Ackley, Hinton, & Sejnowski, 1985; Cottrell, Munro,
connections among the neurons involved. The adjustments are | & Zipser, 1987). Compression is carried out in these models
widely distributed across all of the relevant connections but we by the connections leading from the input to a much smaller
assume they have relatively subtle effects; they tend to facilitate | ‘Presentation layer, and decompression occurs via connections
a repetition of the same act of processing or an essentially sim- leading back from the representation layer to the input layer.
ilar one at a later time or to facilitate reaching the same global _!ntermediate layers can be interposed on either the input or the
state of activation (corresponding, for example, to an entire  Utput side to increase the sophistication of the compression
Proposition or image) when given any fragment or associate of Process, the decompression process, or both (for further discus-
it as a cue.” We assume, however, that the changes that result Sion, see the section on binding in the General Discussion).
from one or a few repetitions of an experience are not sufficient Within the hippocampus itself, we assume that the event or
to support the reinstatement of a pattern representing a specific
Conjunction of arbitrary elements, such as the conjunction of ~ 2 tn gener al, one expects adjustments of connection weights to pro-

. . 5 . : ly at
an arbitrary pair of words in a paired-associates learning exper~ ce a general facilitation of retrieval of the overall pattern through
junction of elements that together compose a changes that occur among the neurons active in the retrieved
specific episode or event. itself eu rons active in the retrieved pattern
Over the course of many repetitions of the same or substan- ree gaat MEHL aS @ more specific facilitation of retrieval from the same
. ae . “ . cue as a result of changes that occur between the neurons representing
tially similar acts of information processing, the changes to the the retrieved pattern and those representing the cue.

=== p-06.png ===
424 J. MCCLELLAND, B. MCNAUGHTON, AND R. O’REILLY
ae sufficiently close to the stored pattern, and if the changes to the
mm & A 2 relevant synaptic efficacies were sufficiently large, this input
iN y, Va would then lead the hippocampal memory system to tend to
19 NN ‘ ME) () YK .' DQ settle into the attractor, thereby filling in the missing aspects of
YA Qi > :
IN , \ \ (/ A) the memory trace. The return pathways from the hippocampal
SS N \ f7 system to the neocortex, together with preexisting intracortical
wa Ss Y connections, then reverse the translation carried out by the for-
YY, ward connections, thereby completing the neocortical rein-
statement of the event pattern and enabling appropriate overt
. responses. Reinstatement in such a system is assumed to be a
Paranippocampat Vl A ®) perithinat matter of degree, varying with the adequacy of the probe, the
Gyrus (TF/TH) (oe WZ Cortex (35/36) amount of initial learning, subsequent interference, and decay,
S rts and the sufficiency of a particular degree of pattern reinstate-
Oo ») 2 s ment for overt behavior will depend on the exact nature of the
Entorhinal Cortex task and behavioral response required.
Cingulste Cortex Reinstatement and Consolidation of Hippocampal
Olfactory Bulb Memories in the Neocortical System
Bn av »>) As just described, reinstatement of patterns stored in the hip-
(J ev) pocampal memory system may occur in task-relevant situa-
4 tions, in which the memory trace is needed for task perfor-
mance. We assume that reinstatement also occurs in off-line
we situations, including active rehearsal, reminiscence, and other
USA Nilo) inactive states including sleep (Marr, 197] ). In such cases, we
S&S Ny assume that reinstatement in the hippocampal memory system
* Orbitoirontal YP 2 < st¢ gives rise, via the return connections, to reinstatement in the
Cortex Insuis neocortical processing system. This would have two important
. . . . consequences. First, reinstatement of the stored event in an ap-

Figure 2. Schematic representation of the inputs and outputs of the propriate context would allow the stored information to be used

hippocampal system in the primate. The upper panel shows the frontal, for controlling behavioral responses. Second, reinstatement

temporal, and parietal areas reciprocally connected with the parahip- : i - > :

pocampal gyrus and the perirhinal cortex, which in turn connect recip- would provide the opportunity for an incremental adjustment
rocally with the entorhinal cortex. The lower panel shows the areas that Of neocortical connections, thereby allowing memories initially
have direct reciprocal connections with the entorhinal cortex. Note. dependent on the hippocampal system gradually to become in-

From “Memory and the Hippocampus,” p. 227, by L. R. Squire, A. P. dependent of it. To the extent that the hippocampal memory

Shimamura, and D. G. Amaral, in Neural Models of Plasticity: Experi- system participates in this reinstatement process, it can be

mental and Theoretical Approaches, edited by J. H. Byrne and W. O. viewed not just as a memory store but as the teacher of the neo-

Berry, 1989, New York: Academic Press. Copyright 1989 by Academic cortical processing system.

Press, Inc. Reprinted with permission. In our view, the same consolidation process applies to the de-
velopment of a neocortical substrate for performance in seman-
tic, encyclopedic, and episodic memory tasks. As we define

experience is represented by a sparse pattern of activity in these terms here, semantic memory tasks are simply those that

which the individual neurons represent specific combinations require the use of information about categories and concepts,
or conjunctions of elements of the event that gave rise to the encyclopedic tasks require the use of specific factual informa-
pattern of activation. We assume that once such a pattern of _ tion, and episodic memory tasks are those that require the use
activity arises in the hippocampal memory system, it may po- of information contained in a specific previous event or episode
tentially become a stable memory. Plastic changes to the syn- in which the individual was an observer or participant. In our
apses on fibers coming into the hippocampus tend to increase view, there is no special distinction between such tasks. Perfor-
the likelihood that a subsequent fragment of the pattern will mance in all three depends initially on plastic changes within
elicit the entire pattern, and plastic changes to synaptic connec- the hippocampal system, but the knowledge underlying the
tions among the neurons active in the pattern tend to make this tasks can eventually be stored in the neocortical system via the
pattern an attractor (i.e., a pattern toward which neighboring gradual accumulation of small changes. Consider the specific
patterns or incomplete versions of the pattern will tend to episode or event in which one first encounters some particular
converge). Several repetitions may be required for these fact, such as Neil Armstrong uttering the words ‘‘That’s one
changes to reach sufficient strength to subserve memory task small step for [a] man” when he first set foot on the moon. Such
performance. During recall, if a part of the pattern representing factual information would be encountered first in a particular
the episode arises again in the neocortical system, this will be context, in this case, perhaps, in the context of watching Arm-
translated into a part of the pattern corresponding to the previ- strong live on TV as he set foot on the moon during a family
ous event in the hippocampal memory system. If the input is reunion celebrating a grandfather’s 70th birthday. If the event of

=== p-07.png ===
COMPLEMENTARY LEARNING SYSTEMS 425
Armstrong’s landing is reinstated repeatedly, the accumulated _ evidence of changes in functional connectivity in the neocortex
changes to neocortical connections could eventually come to _as. a consequence of experience (Gilbert, 1994; Greenough et
preserve the common aspects of the reinstated event. The result al., 1994; Kaas, 1994; Merzenich, Recanzone, Jenkins, & Graj-
would allow the individual to perform correctly in the encyclo- ski, 1990; Singer & Artola, 1994). Much of this work, however,
pedic memory task of recalling what Armstrong said. If the pre- has been restricted to primary sensory systems, and it remains
vious reinstatements had specifically included information to be determined exactly what signals govern the plastic
about the time and place of initial learning, then this informa- changes. Although neocortical synapses exhibit experience-de-
tion, too, would gradually become incorporated into the con- pendent plasticity (Lee, 1983), the bulk of the understanding
nection weights in the neocortical system and would sustain _ of synaptic plasticity comes from physiological studies of the
performance in an episodic memory task. If, however, the rein- hippocampal system.
statements occur in many different contexts, and if these rein- Hippocampal involvement in some forms of memory. Our
statements do not include other aspects of the original context account requires that patterns of activity be propagated into
of encoding, no reliable memory for any particular context and out of the hippocampal system during information
would remain. Much the same process would also apply to the processing. Neuroanatomically, it is clear that the necessary
learning of semantic information, such as the fact that giraffes reciprocal pathways exist to perform these proposed func-
have long necks or the fact that a particular category labelisthe tions (see Figure 2 [reprinted from Squire, Shimamura, &
correct name to apply to a set of items derived from the same = Amaral, 1989b]). The entorhinal cortex is the final con-
prototype. Knapp and Anderson (1984) and McClelland and vergence zone for neocortical inputs to the hippocampus and
Rumelhart (1985) have both presented connectionist models is the main structure mediating return projections from the
in which semantic memory and category learning can arise hippocampus to the neocortex. The entorhinal cortex is
from the gradual accumulation of small changes resulting from quite small relative to the combined size of all of the neocor-
individual events and experiences, tical regions that project to it, suggesting the need for a high
degree of data compression, as previously discussed. As Fig-
Evidence and Comment ure 2 indicates, some of the neocortical inputs to the entorhi-
nal cortex and return pathways from the entorhinal cortex
Our accounts of neocortical processing and learning, of hip- are mediated by the parahippocampal and perirhinal corti-
pocampal involvement in some forms of memory, and of rein- ces, which may serve as the intermediate layers in a sophisti-
statement of hippocampal memories during off-line periods are cated compression-decompression operation.
all grounded in evidence from neuroanatomical and neuro- Our account also asserts that the hippocampal system makes
physiological investigations. We discuss the evidence foreach of _use of representations that are highly specific to the particular
these aspects of our account in turn. There are certainly gaps, conjunctions or combinations of inputs that are active in par-
but we do not dwell on these; we simply describe the evidence ticular experiences. A growing body of data from single unit
that is available. recording in rats is consistent with the idea that these represen-
Neocortical processing and learning. The basic notion that _ tations arise in the hippocampus itself. Part of this evidence
information processing takes place through the propagation of comes from recordings of neurons in the CA3 and CA1 regions
activation among neurons via synaptic connections does not ap- of the hippocampus in spatial tasks (e.g., a task in which the
pear to be in dispute; it is based on more than 100 years of animal explores an eight-arm radial maze to find food rewards
neurophysiological investigation. The evidence is also strong at the ends of the arms). In contrast to neurons in the entorhi-
that the neocortical processing system consists ofa large num- _nal cortex, neurons in these regions fire in a highly selective
ber of interconnected brain areas. A compelling example is the manner, exhibiting “place fields” (O’Keefe & Conway, 1978;
parallel and hierarchical organization of the visual system O’Keefe & Dostrovsky, 1971). Although spatially tuned to
(Felleman & Van Essen, 1991). Neurons in each area project to some extent, entorhinal neurons tend to fire much less selec-
other neurons, both within the same area and in several other _ tively. This is illustrated in Figure 3 (reprinted from McNaugh-
areas. Activation is propagated into and out of this system of ton & Barnes, 1990), which contrasts the spatial firing pattern
brain regions via a number of different pathways specific to par- of a typical neuron in CA3 with that of a typical entorhinal
ticular sensory modalities, effector systems, or both. Generally, neuron on the basis of data from Barnes, McNaughton, Mizu-
the projections between brain areas are bidirectional, so that mori, Leonard, and Lin (1990). Place fields of hippocampal
activity in one part of the system can potentially influence ac- neurons can be seen as representing conjunctions of cues
tivity in many other parts in both feed-forward and feedback (including cues arising from the animal’s inertial sense of direc-
directions. tion and location; Knierim, Kudrimoti, & McNaughton, in
The idea that processing depends on the pattern of synaptic press) that, together, define a place in the environment. In fact,
connections among neurons and that adaptive changes in pro- it may be better to think of these neurons as coding for conjunc-
cessing occur through the modification of such connections is tions that define situations rather than simply places, because
axiomatic in neuroscience. The notion that higher level, cogni- the firing of a hippocampal neuron jin a particular location in
tive forms of learning are mediated by plastic changes in these space is conditional on the task as well as the animal’s location
connections goes back at least to James (1890) and Hebb in the environment (Gothard, Skaggs, Moore, & McNaughton,
(1949), At a physiological level, these changes probably occur 1994; Qin, Markus, McNaughton, & Barnes, 1994). Also, note
through strengthening and weakening, as well as creation and _ that the hippocampal representation is very sparse in compari-
pruning, of synaptic contacts between neurons. There is strong son with the entorhinal input. In a given situation, a far smaller

=== p-08.png ===
426 J. MCCLELLAND, B. MCNAUGHTON, AND R. O’REILLY
ENTORHINAL CAB and postsynaptic depolarization (Wigstrém, Gustaffson, &
Huang, !986). Chemical agents that block the NMDA receptor
} | prevent long-term potentiation with little effect on the transmis-
ay, -. \ / sion process per se (Collingridge, Kehl, & McLennan, 1983;
> Harris, Ganong, & Cotman, 1984). Crucially, these agents also
ein “oF —_ block learning in spatial memory tasks without interfering with
f ey, So \ expression of learning that occurred at a previous time or pro-
i | ducing retrograde amnesia (Morris, Anderson, Lynch, &
Baudry, 1986). In addition, electrical stimulation that suffi-
Figure 3. Response profiles of a representative neuron in the CA3 re- fently ans cTP ial the hippocampus also produces pro-
gion of the hippocampus and of a representative neuron in entorhinal found de cits in spatial learning (Barnes et al., 1994) and a
cortex during performance in a spatial working memory task in the temporally limited retrograde amnesia (McNaughton, Barnes,
eight-arm radial maze. Response profiles are shown in the form of bars Rao, Baldwin, & Rasmussen, 1986 ).
perpendicular to the arms of the runway, indicating the number of times As previously noted, there is evidence from lesion studies of
the particular neuron fired as the animal repeatedly traversed the maze. involvement of parts of the hippocampal system other than the
Black bars indicate firing as the animal progressed inward on the indi- hippocampus itself in several ferms of learning. Lesions includ-
cated arm, and white bars indicate firing as the animal progressed out- ing these structures can produce deficits that are more severe
ward. Note. From “From Cooperative Synaptic Enhancement to Asso- _ than lesions restricted to the hippocampus, suggesting that
Ciative Memory: Bridging the Abyss,” by B. L. McNaughton andC.A. some of the plastic changes underlying performance in some
aw Gardens Con nan peeiuclonces a B. 412 Copyright 1990 hippocampal-system-dependent tasks may lie outside the hip-
“ * . pocampus itself. Exactly how plasticity in other zones con-
tributes to memory performance is a matter of considerable on-
going discussion (see Eichenbaum et al., 1994, and the accom-
percentage of neurons in the hippocampus itself are firing than panying commentary). There are several possibilities that are
in the entorhinal cortex (Barnes et al., 1990; Quirk, Muller, & consistent with our overall account. First, particular subareas
Kubie, 1990). The use of sparse, conjunctive coding in the hip- of the parahippocampal region may be involved in bidirectional
pocampus means that its representations of situations that communication of specific types of information between the
differ only slightly may have relatively little overlap (Marr, 1969; hippocampal system and the neocortex; ifso, one would expect
McNaughton & Morris, 1987; O’Reilly & McClelland, 1994). lesions to these subareas to have specific effects on memories
Our account requires the availability of a mechanism for syn- that involve the relevant types of information, as Suzuki (1994)
aptic plasticity in the hippocampus and specifically assumes has suggested. Second, as a borderline area between the hippo-
that the synaptic changes provided by these changes serve as the campus and the neocortex, the brain areas surrounding the hip-
substrate of initial learning in hippocampal-system-dependent pocampus may participate in some forms of information pro-
memory tasks. There is now considerable evidence that such a cessing, including, for example, retention of information about
mechanism exists in the hippocampus (for reviews, see Mc- the recent occurrence of novel stimuli for short periods of time
Naughton & Morris, 1987; McNaughton & Nadel, 1990). The (Gaffan & Murray, 1992). Such functions may coexist with
mechanism is a form of plasticity known as associative long- _ these areas’ involvement in bidirectional communication be-
term potentiation (LTP). LTP has been studied extensively in tween the hippocampus itself and the rest of the neocortical
the rodent hippocampus since the studies of Bliss and Gardner- system. A third possibility is that there is a hierarchy of plastic-
Medwin (1973) and Bliss and Lomo (1973). Associative LTP ity such that learning in the hippocampus itself is very rapid,
is found particularly in the synapses from the axons of the prin- learning in the neocortical system is very slow, and learning in
cipal neurons of the entorhinal cortex onto the dendrites of the the regions around the hippocampus occurs at an intermediate
principal neurons in the dentate and CA3 regions of the hippo- rate. This could explain why damage restricted to the hippo-
campus, as well as the synapses from the axons of the principal campus itself may produce a milder deficit in new learning and
neurons in CA3 onto the dendrites of other neurons in CA3 and a milder retrograde amnesia than more extensive hippocampal
neurons in CA1, LTP may be the experimental manifestation system lesions (Squire, Zola-Morgan, & Alvarez, 1994; Zola-
of the synaptic modifications that underlie the contribution of Morgan, Squire, & Amaral, 1986).
the hippocampus to some forms of learning and memory Reinstatement of hippocampal memories. There is little di-
(Marr, 1971; McNaughton & Morris, 1987). LTP in these syn- rect evidence of hippocampal involvement in the reinstatement
apses can last for days to weeks depending on the intensity and of patterns of activity in the neocortex, but there is evidence of
duration of the inducing stimulation (Abraham & Otani, 1991; reinstatement in the hippocampus itself of patterns derived
Barnes, 1979), and it is associative in that it normally depends —_ from recent experiences. The evidence is based on activity re-
on near-synchronous input to the receiving neuron by a large corded in rats during periods of slow wave sleep. In both pri-
number of convergent fibers (Barrionuevo & Brown, 1983; mates and rodents, hippocampal electrical activity during slow
Levy & Steward, 1979; McNaughton, Douglas, & Goddard, wave sleep (as well as during quiet wakefulness) is characterized
1978). This form of LTP depends critically on the activation of by a unique pattern called sharp waves ( Buzsaki, 1989; O’Keefe
a special type of postsynaptic receptor known as the N-methyl- & Nadel, 1978). Hippocampal sharp waves are brief periods of
D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor, which is activated by the con- quasi-synchronous, high-frequency burst discharge of hippo-
junction of transmitter release from the presynaptic terminal campal neurons lasting about 100 ms. In theory, such activity

=== p-09.png ===
COMPLEMENTARY LEARNING SYSTEMS 427
provides the optimal conditions for synaptic plasticity indown- —_ follows from the assumption that the learning actually takes
stream neurons (Buzsaki, 1989; Douglas, 1977; McNaughton, place directly within the connections among the neural popula-
1983). Buzsaki (1989) and his colleagues (Chrobak & Buzsaki, tions that were activated during the acquisition process.

1994) have provided a strong case that sharp waves arise in the Our account of the organization of learning in the brain is
CA3 region of the hippocampus and are propagated both to the intended as a provisional factual characterization. It embodies
CAI region and to the output layers of the entorhinal cortex, some unproven assumptions, and so it might be viewed as a
from which they can be propagated widely to the neocortical theory of memory in some sense. We offer it, however, not as a
system. Thus, patterns stored in the hippocampus might com- theory in itself but as a starting place for theoretical discussion.
plete themselves during hippocampal sharp waves, thereby pro- Although it is neither fully explicit nor complete (some gaps,
viding an opportunity for reinstatement in the neocortex. Sim- such as a consideration of spared conditioning of responses to
ulation studies (Shen & McNaughton, 1994) demonstrate that _ individual salient cues, are discussed in later sections), the ac-
random activity can‘sometimes lead to reinstatement ofattrac- count appears to be broadly compatible with a large body of
tors previously stored in a hippocampuslike associative net- data, and it is consistent enough with many of the other ac-
work. In support of these proposals, Pavlides and Winson counts considered in the General Discussion section that we
(1989) have shown that hippocampal neurons that have been suggest it is useful to treat it as provisionally correct, at least in
selectively activated during a prior episode of waking behavior its essentials.
are selectively more active during subsequent slow wave and
paradoxical sleep. More recently, Wilson and McNaughton Key Questions About the Organization of Memory in
(1994a, 1994b) have found that the cross-correlation structure the Brain
that arises in a large population (50~100) of simultaneously re-
corded CAI neurons during exploration of an environment is Supposing provisionally that our account is basically correct,
preserved in subsequent sharp wave activity while the animal is | we can now ask, why is it that the system is organized in this
resting or sleeping in an entirely different apparatus. This cor- _ particular way? Two key functional questions arise:
relational structure is absent during sleep periods before explo- : : spe
tation. Thus, there is now strong empirical support for the idea I. wey isa hi pel ets l mn necessary, i ultimately
that memory traces—or, at least, correlations of activity associ- performance in all sorts of memory tasks Ccpends on

: . i . changes in connections within the neocortical system?
ated with such traces—are indeed reactivated in the rat hippo- hr he ch: t made directly in th tical
campus during “off-line” periods. Why are the changes not made directly in the neocortic

system in the first place?
Summary 2. Why does incorporation of new material into the neo-
cortical system take such a long time? Why are the changes

We can now summarize our account of the organization of to neocortical connections not made more rapidly, shortly
the memory system by noting how it accounts for the main fea- after initial storage in the hippocampal system?
tures of the pattern of deficits and spared performance found
piter a hippocampal system lesion. we deficit in the aby to Successes and Failures of Connectionist Models of

cal ew ‘y ions Invi ng con) jons ues .

from a few exposures would arise from the fact that these asso- Learning and Memory

ciations would have been stored in the (now destroyed) hippo- The answers we suggest to these questions arise from the
campal system; the small changes that would occur in the neo- _ study of learning in artificial neural network or connectionist
cortical system could contribute to repetition priming effects models that adhere to many aspects of the account of the mam-
but would be insufficient to support normal rates of acquisition malian memory system provided earlier, but do not incorporate
in semantic and episodic memory tasks and other tasks that de- a special system for rapid acquisition of the contents of specific
pend on the acquisition of novel conjunctions of arbitrary episodes and events. Such networks are similar to the neocorti-
material. cal processing system in that they may consist of several mod-

The spared acquisition of skills would arise from the gradual ules and pathways interconnecting the modules, but they are
accumulation of small changes in the connections among the monolithic in the sense that knowledge is stored directly in the
relevant neural populations in the neocortical system, as well connections among the units of the system that carries out in-
as other relevant brain systems. The temporally extended and formation processing, and there is no separate system for rapid
graded nature of retrograde amnesia would reflect the fact that learning of the contents of particular inputs.
information initially stored in the hippocampal memory sys-
tem can become incorporated into the neocortical system only —_yiscovery of Shared Structure Through Interleaved
very gradually, as a result of the small size of the changes made Learnin:

A Ig
on each reinstatement.

The ability of even very profound amnesics to acquire often- The first and perhaps most crucial point is that, in such
repeated material gradually (Glisky, Schacter, & Tulving, monolithic connectionist systems, there are tremendous ulti-
1986a, 1986b; B. Milner et al., 1968) would likewise reflect this mate benefits of what we call interleaved learning. By in-
slow accumulation of changes in the neocortical system after terleaved learning we mean learning in which a particular item
the onset of amnesia. The fact that such learning is often re- is not learned all at once but is acquired very gradually, through
stricted to the specific task contexts in which it was acquired a series of presentations interleaved with exposure to other ex-

=== p-10.png ===
428 J. MCCLELLAND, B. MCNAUGHTON, AND R. O’REILLY
amples from the domain. The adjustments made to connection networks can store knowledge of concepts in a succinct form,
weights on each exposure to an example are small; thus, the with information that is true of all of the concepts in an entire
overall direction of connection adjustment is governed not by branch of the tree at the top of the branch. For example, the
the particular characteristics of individual associations but by Predicate has feathers can be stored at the bird node because it
the shared structure common to the environment from which is true of all birds. This allows generalization to new instances.
these individual associations are sampled. When a new type of thing is encountered, such as an egret, peo-
Consider, in this context, some of the facts known about rob- ple need only to be told that it is a bird and to link the new
ins. It is known that a robin is a bird, it has wings, it has feathers, node for egret to the node for bird by an isa link. Then their
it can fly, it breathes, it must eat to stay alive, and so on. This knowledge of egrets can inherit all that is known about birds.
knowledge is not totally arbitrary knowledge about robins but Semantic networks of this type were very popular vehicles for
is, in fact, part of a system of knowledge about robins, herons, representation for a period of time in the 1970s, but apparent
eagles, sparrows, and many other things. Indeed, much of the experimental support (Collins & Quillian, 1969) for the hy-
information accumulated about robins probably does not come pothesis that people’s knowledge of concepts is organized in this
from specific experience with robins but from other, related way was illusory (Rips, Shoben, & Smith, 1973). Computation-
things. Some such knowledge comes from very closely related ally, semantic networks of this type become cumbersome to use
things of which people may have knowledge (e.g., other birds), when they contain a large amount of information (Fahlman,
whereas other knowledge may come from other things less 1981), It becomes very difficult to determine when it is appro-
closely related but still related enough in particular ways to sup- priate to consider a property to be essentially common to a cat-
port some knowledge sharing (e.g., other animals or even other egory, even though there are exceptions, and when it is appro-
living things). A key issue in the use of concepts is the fact that priate to consider a property sufficiently variable that it must be
what counts as related is by no means obvious and is not, in enumerated separately on the instances. The problem is com-
general, predictable from surface properties. Birds are more re- pounded by the fact that most concepts are constituents of
lated to, for example, reptiles and fish than they are to insects. multiple intersecting hierarchies, in which case intractable in-
Connectionist models that use interleaved learning suggest heritance conflicts can arise.
how knowledge of relations among concepts may develop. Both Connectionist models offer a very different way of accounting
Hinton (1989) and Rumelhart (1990; Rumelhart & Todd, for the ability to generalize knowledge from one concept to an-
1993) developed simulations to illustrate how connectionist other. According to this approach (Hinton, 1981; Touretzky &
networks can learn representations appropriate for organized Geva, 1987), generalization depends on a process that assigns
bodies of conceptual knowledge. We use the Rumelhart exam- each concept an internal representation that captures its con-
ple here because it relates to the domain of knowledge about ceptual similarity to other concepts. This alternative approach
living things that we have already begun to consider as an exam- appears to be more consistent with the psychological evidence
ple and because, as shown later, there are some empirical data (Rips et al., 1973), because the evidence favors the view that
about the development of children’s knowledge that this model _ conceptual similarity judgments are made by comparing repre-
can help one understand. The specific example is highly simpli- sentations of concepts directly rather than searching for com-
fied and abstract. It captures approximately the constraints that mon parents in a hierarchically structured tree. This alternative
may be operative in the discovery of conceptual structure from also overcomes the vexing questions about how to handle par-
an ensemble of sentences that convey simple propositional __ tially regular traits and exceptions, because idiosyncratic as well
statements about living things, in that concepts are represented as common properties can be captured in these representations.
by arbitrary tokens (akin to words) rather than by percepts that The approach depends on exploiting the ability of a network
directly provide some information about the concepts under to discover the relations among concepts through interleaved
consideration. The conceptual structure resides not in the di- learning. The network is trained on a set of specific propositions
rect appearance of the words that convey the concepts but in about various concepts, and, in the course of training, it learns
the relations that the concepts referred to by the words enter similar representations for similar concepts. By similar con-
into with other concepts. cepts, we mean concepts that enter into overlapping sets of
Human knowledge of the domain of living things appears to propositions.
be organized hierarchically, with a principal grouping into Rumelhart (1990) trained a network on propositions about
plants and animals and then other, finer subgroupings within a number of concepts: living things, plants, animals, trees, oaks,
each of these broad classes (we refer not to objective biological pines, flowers, roses, daisies, animals, birds, canaries, robins,
information per se but to the cognitive representations that peo- fish, salmon, and sunfish. The training data were the set of true
ple have of this information). Previous symbolic approaches propositions either explicitly represented in or derivable from
to knowledge representation directly imported the hierarchical the semantic network shown in Figure 4. The connectionist net-
organization of knowledge into their structure, representing work used to learn these propositions is shown in Figure 5. It
knowledge about concepts in a data structure known as a se- consists of a number of nonlinear connectionist processing
mantic network (Quillian, 1968; see Figure 4). Such networks units organized into several modules, connected as illustrated
are not to be confused with connectionist networks, because in the figure. Arrows signify complete connectivity from all of
they represent and process information in fundamentally the units in the module at the sending end of the arrows to all of
different ways. In the semantic network, concepts are organized the units at the receiving end. Input to the network is presented
hierarchically by means of links called isa links, as a short form by activating the unit for a concept name in the concept input
of the statement Ar_X is a Y. Given this organization, semantic module on the upper left and the unit for a relation term in the

